0 Overview & Syllabus

Data Science in Real Life
About this course: Have you ever had the perfect data science experience? The data pull went perfectly. There were no merging errors or missing data. Hypotheses were clearly defined prior to analyses. Randomization was performed for the treatment of interest. The analytic plan was outlined prior to analysis and followed exactly. The conclusions were clear and actionable decisions were obvious. Has that every happened to you? Of course not. Data analysis in real life is messy. How does one manage a team facing real data analyses? In this one-week course, we contrast the ideal with what happens in real life. By contrasting the ideal, you will learn key concepts that will help you manage real life analyses. 

This is a focused course designed to rapidly get you up to speed on doing data science in real life. Our goal was to make this as convenient as possible for you without sacrificing any essential content. We've left the technical information aside so that you can focus on managing your team and moving it forward.

After completing this course you will know how to:

1, Describe the “perfect” data science experience
2. Identify strengths and weaknesses in experimental designs
3. Describe possible pitfalls when pulling / assembling data and learn solutions for managing data pulls.
4. Challenge statistical modeling assumptions and drive feedback to data analysts
5. Describe common pitfalls in communicating data analyses
6. Get a glimpse into a day in the life of a data analysis manager.

The course will be taught at a conceptual level for active managers of data scientists and statisticians.  Some key concepts being discussed include:
1. Experimental design, randomization, A/B testing
2. Causal inference, counterfactuals, 
3. Strategies for managing data quality.
4. Bias and confounding
5. Contrasting machine learning versus classical statistical inference

Course promo:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9BIYmw5wnBI

Course cover image by Jonathan Gross. Creative Commons BY-ND https://flic.kr/p/q1vudb
More
Created by:  Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins University

Taught by:  Brian Caffo, PhD, Professor, Biostatistics

Bloomberg School of Public Health

Taught by:  Jeff Leek, PhD, Associate Professor, Biostatistics

Bloomberg School of Public Health

Taught by:  Roger D. Peng, PhD, Associate Professor, Biostatistics

Bloomberg School of Public Health
Basic Info	
Course 4 of 5 in the Executive Data Science Specialization
Commitment	1 week of study, 4-6 hours
Language	
English
How To Pass	Pass all graded assignments to complete the course.
User Ratings	
Average User Rating 4.4See what learners said
Course 4 of Specialization
Be The Leader Your Data Team Needs
Learn to lead a data science team that generates first-rate analyses in four courses.

Executive Data Science Johns Hopkins University



Syllabus
WEEK 1
Introduction, the perfect data science experience
This course is one module, intended to be taken in one week. Please do the course roughly in the order presented. Each lecture has reading and videos. Except for the introductory lecture, every lecture has a 5 question quiz; get 4 out of 5 or better on the quiz.
22 videos, 10 readings
Video: Just for fun, course promotional video
Reading: Pre-Course Survey
Reading: Course structure
Reading: Grading
Video: Data science in the ideal versus real life Part 1
Video: Data science in the ideal versus real life Part 2
Video: Examples
Video: Machine Learning vs. Traditional Statistics Part 1
Video: Machine Learning vs. Traditional Statistics Part 2
Reading: The data pull is clean
Video: Managing the Data Pull
Reading: The experiment is carefully designed
Video: Experimental design and observational analysis
Video: Causality part 1
Video: Causality Part 2
Video: What Can Go Wrong?: Confounding
Reading: The experiment is carefully designed, things to do
Video: A/B Testing
Video: Sampling bias and random sampling
Video: Blocking and adjustment
Reading: Results of analyses are clear
Video: Multiplicity
Video: Effect size, significance, & modeling
Video: Comparison with benchmark effects
Video: Negative controls
Reading: The decision is obvious
Video: Non-significance
Video: Estimation Target is Relevant
Reading: The analysis product is awesome
Video: Report writing
Video: Version control
Reading: Post-Course Survey
Show less
Graded: The Data Pull is Clean
Graded: The experiment is carefully designed principles
Graded: The experiment is carefully designed, things to do
Graded: Results of analyses are clear
Graded: The Decision is Obvious
Graded: The analysis product is awesome
 
 
Classs Files 
 
This Course: 
Data Science in Real Life

What you've gotten yourself into
LectureJust for fun, course promotional video
1 min
ReadingPre-Course Survey
10 min
ReadingCourse structure
10 min
ReadingGrading
10 min
LectureData science in the ideal versus real life Part 1
4 min
LectureData science in the ideal versus real life Part 2
3 min
LectureExamples
7 min
LectureMachine Learning vs. Traditional Statistics Part 1
14 min
LectureMachine Learning vs. Traditional Statistics Part 2
3 min

The data pull is clean
ReadingThe data pull is clean
10 min
LectureManaging the Data Pull
11 min
Purchase course to unlock this item.
Quiz: The Data Pull is Clean
5 questions

The experiment is carefully designed, principles
ReadingThe experiment is carefully designed
10 min
LectureExperimental design and observational analysis
10 min
LectureCausality part 1
8 min
LectureCausality Part 2
9 min
LectureWhat Can Go Wrong?: Confounding
5 min
Purchase course to unlock this item.
Quiz: The experiment is carefully designed principles
5 questions

The experiment is carefully designed, things to do
ReadingThe experiment is carefully designed, things to do
10 min
LectureA/B Testing
9 min
LectureSampling bias and random sampling
5 min
LectureBlocking and adjustment
11 min
Purchase course to unlock this item.
Quiz: The experiment is carefully designed, things to do
5 questions

Results of analyses are clear

The Decision is obvious
ReadingThe decision is obvious
10 min
LectureNon-significance
5 min
LectureEstimation Target is Relevant
10 min
Purchase course to unlock this item.
Quiz: The Decision is Obvious
5 questions

The analysis product is awesome
ReadingThe analysis product is awesome
10 min
LectureReport writing
8 min
LectureVersion control
4 min
Purchase course to unlock this item.
Quiz: The analysis product is awesome
5 questions

Post-Course Survey
ReadingPost-Course Survey
10 min
 
